`Contents <README.md>`__

Fitters
=======

To keep fitters as simple and re-useable as possible, they should only
require ``sigma`` (some representatio of a point in fit-space, like a
vector) and ``cost_fn`` (some function for determining error based on
sigma) as arguments. This keeps fitter functions from needing to know
anything about the model architecture, and ensures easy compatibility
with popular fitting packages like scipy.minimize. Any additional
functionality related to fitting, such as only fitting certain subsets
of data or using a different fitter for a specific module, should be
handled by an analysis (for a generalizeable function) or a script (for
a very specific problem) as appropriate.

Termination Conditions
----------------------

The termination conditions fitters are usually pretty similar, so we
placed some generic termination condition functions in
``fitters/termination_conditions.py``. Most fitters will have similar
conditions for when to stop the fitting process: when the elapsed time,
step size, or error delta reaches some value.

Termination condition functions should take in a step\_info dict and
return a boolean. If more than one condition should be checked, fitters
may combine more than one termination conditions using the appropriate
``and`` or ``or`` expressions and a lambda function.

For example, many fitters look like:

::

    import termination_conditions as tc

    def my_fitter(sigma, cost_fn):

        stepinfo, update_stepinfo = tc.create_stepinfo()
        stop_fit = lambda : (tc.error_non_decreasing(stepinfo, tolerance) or
                             tc.max_iterations_reached(stepinfo, 1000))

        while not stop_fit():
            better_sigma = ...     # Find a better sigma somehow
            sigma = better_sigma
            err = cost_fn(sigma=sigma)
            update_stepinfo(err=err, sigma=sigma)

        return sigma

Conventions for Termination Conditions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

1) The name of the function should describe the event that will cause
   the fitting loop to stop, and return True to indicate a stop. For
   example, 'error\_non\_decreasing' returns a value of True when, as
   the name implies, the error is no longer decreasing by an amount at
   least equal to the specified tolerance.

As a result, fitters should generally refer to the step\_condition in
terms of: 'if termination\_condition : ' Using the reverse naming and
return values should be avoided.

2) The expected structure of step\_info is made with create\_stepinfo().
   For example:

   stepinfo = {'num': 1, # Num of steps taken thus far 'err': 03.93, #
   The cost to minimize 'err\_delta': None, # Change in cost since last
   step 'start\_time': time.time()}

These are the four default keys, but you may add more if you want to
have more exotic termination conditions.
