PLUGINS
=======

What are they?
--------------

Plugins are an attempt to allow a user or group of users to either
overwrite or add to the modulespec and xforms keywords found in the NEMS
repository without needing to manage different git branches, deal with
conflicting code, or even include the new code in any sort of version
control system at all.

In short, The plugins system imports functions from an arbitrary number
of user-specified paths (that need not be included in the pythonpath
prior to runtime), and adds those functions to the same registry used by
the default NEMS functions.

Why should you bother using them?
---------------------------------

If you have some new keywords or xforms loaders/fitters that you want to
use with NEMS, but don't think they belong in the main NEMS repository,
using plugins can be a lot simpler than managing git branches.

How to
------

Let's say you don't like how the modulespec keyword 'wc' works. Maybe
you need to be able to pass it more options, or maybe you want to test
out some new priors. To do this:

-  Create a module where you want the new verison of the function to
   live.

::

    touch /my/custom/code/new_fir.py

-  Define the function just like any other!

But note that *all* functions in the module will be registered by
default, unless they are preceeded with one or more underscores or are
in all-caps (to exclude private and global variables, respectively).

::

    def wc(kw):
        # Do whatever you want your code to do!
        # Then return the new modulespec structure.
        return {'fn': 'nems.modules.weight_channels',
                'phi': ...}

Alternatively, if you want to use your own code but don't want to
overwrite the core version (for a side-by-side comparison, for example),
you can call your new function whatever you want - just use that new
keyword when defining your modelname.

Important: when naming new keywords, DO NOT USE UNDERSCORES as these
will be parsed incorrectly by the xforms pipeline. Most existing
keywords use all lowercase letters.

::

    def mywc(kw):
        return {'fn': ...}

Note that this is also an easy way to point keywords to a different
implementation of the underlying module by simply changing the 'fn'
entry of the returned modulespec.

-  Tell nems.config where to find the module

In nems/configs/settings.py (you may need to create settings.py if you
haven't run NEMS yet on a new install), add the path to the new module
to the list for the appropriate plugins variable (or you may need to
start a new list if you haven't set one up yet). For example:

::

    KEYWORD_PLUGINS = ['~/jacob/nems_keywords/wc.py']

Or, depending on how you prefer to organize your code, you can also just
point to the directory containing the module (which might have other
modules containing other plugins definitions):

::

    KEYWORD_PLUGINS = ['~/jacob/nems_keywords/']

-  You're done!
